OTel bridge spec (#516)
elastic/apm: specs/agents/tracing-api-otel.md

```javascript
// otel_span contains the properties set through the OTel API
span_or_transaction = null;
if (otel_span.remote_contex != null) {
    span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);
} else if (otel_span.parent == null) {
    span_or_transaction = createRootTransaction();
} else {
    span_or_transaction = createSpanWithParent(otel_span.parent);
}
```

### Span Kind

OTel spans have an `SpanKind` property ([specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind)) which is close but not strictly equivalent to our definition of spans and transactions.

For both transactions and spans, an optional `otel.span_kind` property will be provided by agents when set through
the OTel API.
This value should be stored into Elasticsearch documents to preserve OTel semantics and help future OTel integration.

Possible values are `CLIENT`, `SERVER`, `PRODUCER`, `CONSUMER` and `INTERNAL`, refer to [specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind) for details on semantics.

> When `otel.span_kind` is not provided by agent, server should infer it using the following algorithm:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `otel.span_kind` is not provided by the agent, APM Server should infer it using the following algorithm:
```

    }
} else {
    // span
    if (item.type == "external" || item.type == "storage") {
        span_kind = "CLIENT";
    }
}

if (span_kind == null) {
    span_kind = "INTERNAL";
}

```

### Attributes mapping

OTel relies on key-value pairs for span attributes.
Keys and values are protocol-specific and are defined in [semantic convention](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions) specification.

In order to minimize the mapping complexity in agents, most of the mapping between OTel attributes and agent protocol will be delegated to APM server:
- All OTel span attributes should be captured as-is and written to agent protocol.
- APM server will handle the mapping between OTel attributes and their native transaction/spans equivalents
- Some native span/transaction attributes will still require mapping within agents for [compatibility with existing features](#compatibility-mapping)

OpenTelemetry attributes should be stored in `otel.attributes` as a flat key-value pair mapping added to `span` and `transaction` objects:
```json
{
  // [...] other span/transaction attributes
  "otel": {

>     "span_kind": "client",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "span_kind": "CLIENT",
```

that is applied to handle native OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) intake.

### Compatibility mapping

Agents should ensure compatibility with the following features:
- breakdown metrics
- [dropped spans statistics](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md)
- [compressed spans](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-compress.md)

As a consequence, agents have to infer and provide values for the following attributes:
- `transaction.name`
- `transaction.type`
- `span.name`
- `span.type`
- `span.subtype`
- `span.name`
- `span.destination.service.resource`

### Active Spans and Context

OTel has the concept of "active context", which is implemented as a key-value map and is used for local context
propagation implicitly through thread-locals or explicitly through API.

Our agents may not have a similar abstraction and only have the currently active span or transaction stored into a thread-local stack.
Making OTel span active means adding a reference to it in the current context, deactivating is restoring the context
before activation.

As a result, a proper bridge implementation should ensure transparent interoperability between Elastic and OTel spans from their respective APIs

> - When an Elastic span is active, the OTel current context API should have the Elastic span as current
> - When an OTel context is activated, the OTel current context API should provide access to it (likely stored as a thread-local).
> - Activating an OTel span on top of an Elastic span should behave exactly as if the underlying span was created using OTel API.
> - Activating an Elastic span on top of an OTel span should behave like if the underlying span was created from Elastic API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After activating an Elastic span via the agent's API, the [`Context`] returned via the [get current context API] should contain that Elastic span
- When an OTel context is [attached] (aka activated), the [get current context API] should return the same [`Context`] instance.
- Starting an OTel span in the scope of an active Elastic span should make the OTel span a child of the Elastic span.
- Starting an Elastic span in the scope of an active OTel span should make the Elastic span a child of the OTel span.

[`Context`]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md
[attached]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md#attach-context
[get current context API]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md#get-current-context
```

## OpenTelemetry API (Tracing)

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) (OTel in short) provides a vendor-neutral API that allows to capture tracing, logs and metrics data.

> Agents may provide a bridge implementation of OpenTracing Tracing API following this specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Agents may provide a bridge implementation of OpenTelemetry Tracing API following this specification.
```

or did you actually mean OpenTracing here? (If so, then I am a little confused.)

} else {
    span_or_transaction = createSpanWithParent(otel_span.parent);
}
```

### Span Kind

OTel spans have an `SpanKind` property ([specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind)) which is close but not strictly equivalent to our definition of spans and transactions.

For both transactions and spans, an optional `otel.span_kind` property will be provided by agents when set through
the OTel API.
This value should be stored into Elasticsearch documents to preserve OTel semantics and help future OTel integration.

Possible values are `CLIENT`, `SERVER`, `PRODUCER`, `CONSUMER` and `INTERNAL`, refer to [specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind) for details on semantics.

When `otel.span_kind` is not provided by the agent, APM Server should infer it using the following algorithm:

```javascript
span_kind = null;
if (isTransaction(item)) {
    if (item.type == "messaging") {
        span_kind = "CONSUMER";
    } else if (item.type == "request") {
        span_kind = "SERVER";
    }
} else {
    // span

>     if (item.type == "external" || item.type == "storage") {

Reviewer 3: Should `item.type == "db"` also be included in this?

Author: Thanks for catching this ! I've just updated the spec.

## OpenTelemetry API (Tracing)

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) (OTel in short) provides a vendor-neutral API that allows to capture tracing, logs and metrics data.

Agents may provide a bridge implementation of OpenTelemetry Tracing API following this specification.

Bridging here means that for each OTel span created with the API, a native span/transaction will be created and sent to APM server.

From the perspective of the application code calling the OTel API, the delegation to a native span/transaction is transparent.
Also, this means that any OTel processors will be bypassed and ignored by the bridge.

### Spans and Transactions

OTel only defines Spans, whereas Elastic APM relies on both Spans and Transactions.
OTel allows users to provide the _remote context_ when creating a span, which is equivalent to providing a parent to a transaction or span,
it also allows to provide a (local) parent span.

As a result, when creating Spans through OTel API with a bridge, agents must implement the following algorithm:

```javascript
// otel_span contains the properties set through the OTel API
span_or_transaction = null;
if (otel_span.remote_contex != null) {

>     span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);

Author: That's a very good point here, thanks for pointing that !

While we can't really know if the parent will be sent to ES and thus visible in Kibana, we could guess when it is coming from an Elastic agent, for example by parsing the `tracestate` header that should contain our vendor-specific key, but that would not work as expected with `service with Elastic > service with OTel > service with Elastic` where the `OTel` propagates upstream `tracestate` from the parent `Elastic` agent.

In other words, we need to have a way to know if the direct parent is properly captured by an Elastic agent or not.

>     span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);

Author: In the [W3c spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#relationship-between-the-headers), this is probably why the ID of the parent in `traceparent` is duplicated in `tracestate`. If we were doing that, it would be easy to detect when the parent is also captured with an Elastic agent or not.

>     span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);

Reviewer: Interesting discussion but this is orthogonal to OTel. I think we can probably solve that in the context of https://github.com/elastic/apm/issues/286.

> OTel span which we may not have in elasticsearch

As the APM Server has an OTLP intake, the OTel spans may very well be in ES.

Agents may provide a bridge implementation of OpenTelemetry Tracing API following this specification.

Bridging here means that for each OTel span created with the API, a native span/transaction will be created and sent to APM server.

From the perspective of the application code calling the OTel API, the delegation to a native span/transaction is transparent.
Also, this means that any OTel processors will be bypassed and ignored by the bridge.

### Spans and Transactions

OTel only defines Spans, whereas Elastic APM relies on both Spans and Transactions.
OTel allows users to provide the _remote context_ when creating a span, which is equivalent to providing a parent to a transaction or span,
it also allows to provide a (local) parent span.

As a result, when creating Spans through OTel API with a bridge, agents must implement the following algorithm:

```javascript
// otel_span contains the properties set through the OTel API
span_or_transaction = null;
if (otel_span.remote_contex != null) {
    span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);
} else if (otel_span.parent == null) {

>     span_or_transaction = createRootTransaction();

Reviewer 4: @SylvainJuge @felixbarny Do we want/need to spec any behavior about how the bridge will interact with existing instrumentation?  

I'm not sure what the situation is in java-land, but here's a few use cases that outline why I'm asking. 

In the Node.js agent we automatically start transactions whenever there's an HTTP(S) request being handled regardless of the framework (express, hapi, fastify), and I've been thinking we might want/need to suppress this default behavior if we're also going to start a transaction due to an oTel span being created.  (otherwise that's two transactions per request being handled)

Similarly, there's a question of what to do when there's an oTel instrumentation package that we also instrument.  The Node.js agent has instrumentation for the `express` web framework, but OTel also has instrumentation for the `express` web framework.  What should happen when the Node.js is instrumenting an express application and the bridge is active?

Author: In Java, there is a clear distinction between OTel API (a regular java library) and the OTel instrumentation (also known as OTel instrumentaion agent), thus:
- the OTel bridge only makes the OTel API delegate to our own tracing implementation
- when creating a bridge, there is no such "double instrumentation" as the existing instrumentations are part of the instrumentation agent and are not included in our agent.
- reusing OTel instrumentations is not part of the current proposal, but might be in the future.

If there is no such distinction with API/instrumentation with other platforms, we should then probably clarify this in the spec for which instrumentation have priority. If that would be the case, it also means that we can't distinguish usages of OTel API to instrument custom spans from OTel instrumentation, and that we would just disable our own instrumentations and replace them with OTel ones. This would go way beyond the "create a bridge for the OTel API" goal, thus I hope it's not the case here.

OTel relies on key-value pairs for span attributes.
Keys and values are protocol-specific and are defined in [semantic convention](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions) specification.

In order to minimize the mapping complexity in agents, most of the mapping between OTel attributes and agent protocol will be delegated to APM server:
- All OTel span attributes should be captured as-is and written to agent protocol.
- APM server will handle the mapping between OTel attributes and their native transaction/spans equivalents
- Some native span/transaction attributes will still require mapping within agents for [compatibility with existing features](#compatibility-mapping)

OpenTelemetry attributes should be stored in `otel.attributes` as a flat key-value pair mapping added to `span` and `transaction` objects:
```json
{
  // [...] other span/transaction attributes
  "otel": {
    "span_kind": "CLIENT",
    "attributes": {
      "db.system": "mysql",
      "db.statement": "SELECT * from table_1"
    }
  }
}
```

APM server supports the `otel.attributes` property starting with version 7.16.0.

> When the APM server version does not support `otel.attributes` property, agents should use `labels` as fallback with OTel attribute

Reviewer 5: In my opinion we shouldn't worry about APM Server < 7.16. I think we should remove the fallback to labels. So much of our otel support relies on recent APM Server that I think trying to support older versions is not worth the effort. Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: My confusion lies in knowing how an agent can "know" to use `otel.attributes`, vs. `labels`. I'm thinking we should send attributes solely under `otel.attributes` and offer it as a reason for users to upgrade. `7.16` is old enough (imo) that it's not too much of an ask for them to upgrade to have this feature.

Reviewer 6: ++ to keeping it simple, and just assuming 7.16+ (with docs specifying the requirement). It may require some explanation to users to start with, but that'll diminish over time.

Reviewer: I'm fine with that, too. The downside is that users may not read that part of the docs and then wonder why they don't see any context/labels/attributes. But as you said, this confusion should diminish over time, can be easily solved by pointing to docs and we don't have to complicate the code.

Author: +1 for keeping it simple here, I think that starting the spec (and docs if not already done yet) with a strong pre-requisite on 7.16 server should be enough.

Also, optionally adding a warning on the agent side when APM-server is < 7.16 sounds a good idea.

Please :+1:  or :-1: on this comment and I'll update the spec accordingly.

Author: Clarification after today's meeting, actually the new strategy will likely to keep writing to tags as fallback:
- agents do not have to issue a warning as no information is dropped, it's just not stored in the "right" location, but still there
- apm-server already implements such fallback for the non-standard otel attributes (or the ones that we don't map to our own fields).

Unless someone in @elastic/apm-server sees this as a major issue, I will proceed to revert to the previous state on this within a week.

Author: As there was no further comment on this, I'll close the conversation for now. As a result agents have to implement the label fallback for server < 7.16.

Reviewer 6: @SylvainJuge I missed your earlier comment. From a server perspective, I don't have any concerns. As an agent dev, I'm wondering why we would do this as I wasn't part of the meeting you mentioned. Can you summarise what was discussed, and why the fallback is needed? Is it optional?

name as key.

When the APM server supports `otel.attributes` property, the server-side mapping should be identical to the one
that is applied to handle native OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) intake.

### Compatibility mapping

Agents should ensure compatibility with the following features:
- breakdown metrics
- [dropped spans statistics](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md)
- [compressed spans](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-compress.md)

As a consequence, agents must provide values for the following attributes:
- `transaction.name` or `span.name` : value directly provided by OTel API
- `transaction.type` : see inference algorithm below
- `span.type` and `span.subtype` : see inference algorithm below

> - `span.destination.service.resource` : see inference algorithm below

Reviewer 2: `span.destination.service.resource` is just for exit spans, right?

Reviewer 2: Ah, nevermind. This is implicitly handled in the inference algorithm below. If the inferred `resource` is `undefined`, then we don't set it.

    }

} else if (a['messaging.system']) {
    type = 'messaging';
    subtype = a['messaging.system'];

    if (!netName && a['messaging.url']) {
        netName = parseNetName(a['messaging.url']);
    }
    resource = netName || subtype;
    if (a['messaging.destination']) {
        resource += '/';
        resource += a['messaging.destination'];
    }

} else if (a['rpc.system']) {
    type = 'external';
    subtype = a['rpc.system'];
    resource = netName || subtype;
    if (a['rpc.service']) {
        resource += '/';
        resource += a['rpc.service'];
    }

} else if (a['http.url'] || a['http.scheme']) {
    type = 'external';
    subtype = 'http';

    if (a['http.host'] && a['http.scheme']) {
        resource = a['http.host'] + ':' + httpPortFromScheme(a['http.scheme']);
    } else if (a['http.url']) {
        resource = parseNetName(a['http.url']);
    }
}

if (type === undefined) {
    if (span.otel.span_kind == 'INTERNAL') {
        type = 'app';
        subtype = 'internal';
    } else {
        type = 'unknown';
    }
}
span.type = type;
span.subtype = subtype;
span.destination.service.resource = resource;
```

### Active Spans and Context

> When possible, bridge implementation SHOULD ensure proper interoperability between Elastic transactions/spans and OTel spans when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When possible, bridge implementation MUST ensure proper interoperability between Elastic transactions/spans and OTel spans when
```

When available, implementation MUST be configurable and should be disabled by default when marked as `experimental`.

Bridging here means that for each OTel span created with the API, a native span/transaction will be created and sent to APM server.

From the perspective of the application code calling the OTel API, the delegation to a native span/transaction is transparent.
Also, this means that any OTel processors will be bypassed and ignored by the bridge.

### Spans and Transactions

OTel only defines Spans, whereas Elastic APM relies on both Spans and Transactions.
OTel allows users to provide the _remote context_ when creating a span, which is equivalent to providing a parent to a transaction or span,
it also allows to provide a (local) parent span.

As a result, when creating Spans through OTel API with a bridge, agents must implement the following algorithm:

```javascript
// otel_span contains the properties set through the OTel API
span_or_transaction = null;
if (otel_span.remote_contex != null) {
    span_or_transaction = createTransactionWithParent(otel_span.remote_context);
} else if (otel_span.parent == null) {

>     span_or_transaction = createRootTransaction();

Reviewer: That option seems to be specific to Go and I'm not intimately familiar with it. But I suppose you're right.

} else {
    span_or_transaction = createSpanWithParent(otel_span.parent);
}
```

### Span Kind

OTel spans have an `SpanKind` property ([specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind)) which is close but not strictly equivalent to our definition of spans and transactions.

For both transactions and spans, an optional `otel.span_kind` property will be provided by agents when set through
the OTel API.
This value should be stored into Elasticsearch documents to preserve OTel semantics and help future OTel integration.

Possible values are `CLIENT`, `SERVER`, `PRODUCER`, `CONSUMER` and `INTERNAL`, refer to [specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind) for details on semantics.

> When `otel.span_kind` is not provided by the agent, APM Server should infer it using the following algorithm:

Reviewer 5: Is this a common case in other agents? The [python sdk](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/44e9b5531d91c8c52f58cd4ea3930cda5c1ed662/opentelemetry-sdk/src/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/__init__.py#L972) sets `kind = SpanKind.INTERNAL` by default, I don't think you can have an empty SpanKind when using the main Tracer. I think python will always have `otel.span_kind` set.

Reviewer: The description is a bit misleading. This is about the case when the agent sends regular data that doesn't come from the OTel bridge. In that case, `otel.span_kind` is empty. To ensure that there's always a `span_kind`, no matter whether the agents send it, APM Server auto-infers the `span_kind`. There's nothing the agents need to do.

Reviewer 5: Oh! Then maybe we could use `span_kind` for telemetry purposes. See my previous comment.

Author: I will clarify this statement to make it clear that:
- when using the OTel bridge, the `span_kind` is set to `SpanKind.INTERNAL` by default by the OTel API implementation.
- when the agent produces a span/transaction that does not originates from the OTel bridge and no explicit `otel.span_kind` have been set, then we have to infer it from span/transaction data in order to populate the `otel.span_kind` field that was added in apm-server 7.16.

name as key.

When the APM server supports `otel.attributes` property, the server-side mapping should be identical to the one
that is applied to handle native OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) intake.

### Compatibility mapping

Agents should ensure compatibility with the following features:
- breakdown metrics
- [dropped spans statistics](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md)
- [compressed spans](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-compress.md)

As a consequence, agents must provide values for the following attributes:
- `transaction.name` or `span.name` : value directly provided by OTel API
- `transaction.type` : see inference algorithm below
- `span.type` and `span.subtype` : see inference algorithm below
- `span.destination.service.resource` : see inference algorithm below

#### Transaction type

```javascript
a = transation.otel.attributes;
span_kind = transaction.otel_span_kind;
isRpc = a['rpc.system'] !== undefined;
isHttp = a['http.url'] !== undefined || a['http.scheme'] !== undefined;
if (span_kind == 'SERVER' && (isRpc || isHttp)) {
    type = 'request';

> } else if (span_kind == 'CONSUMER' && isMessaging) {

Reviewer 3: how is `isMessaging` defined?

Reviewer: Good question. @SylvainJuge, could you clarify?

I assume, it's `isMessaging = a['messaging.system']`.

However, that's a bit different in how APM Server would do as it looks for all known messaging attributes: https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/blob/1fad7fd216c60bc67264d70d25fa2f1a2b8e1452/processor/otel/traces.go#L610-L620

Author: Yes, it's exactly that @felixbarny, I've fixed that now, thanks for filling the gaps here.

Regarding the slight differences with how APM server implementation works, I don't think it's worth over-specifying the mapping behavior as the basic `messaging.system` property is expected to be present for all messaging OTel spans. The fact that the APM server will handle more corner cases is just a bonus.

- After activating an Elastic span via the agent's API, the [`Context`] returned via the [get current context API] should contain that Elastic span
- When an OTel context is [attached] (aka activated), the [get current context API] should return the same [`Context`] instance.
- Starting an OTel span in the scope of an active Elastic span should make the OTel span a child of the Elastic span.
- Starting an Elastic span in the scope of an active OTel span should make the Elastic span a child of the OTel span.

[`Context`]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md
[attached]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md#attach-context
[get current context API]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/context.md#get-current-context

Both OTel and our agents have their own definition of what "active context" is, for example:
- Java Agent: Elastic active context is implemented as a thread-local stack
- Java OTel API: active context is implemented as a key-value map propagated through thread local

> In order to avoid potentially complex and tedious synchronization issues between OTel and our existing agent

Reviewer 4: I ran into a little trickiness when implementing the "if there's not a parent span start a transaction" behavior when working on the Node.js Bridge related to the context objects.  I believe I have a path forward for the Node.js agent -- I'm mainly sharing this as background in case other folks run into it (and also forcing myself to say everything out loud in case there's some corner I'm not considering ;))

First -- there's no span builder object in any of the Node.js API or SDK code. Second, neither the `startSpan` or the `startActiveSpan` methods [of the Node.js tracer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-api/blob/main/src/trace/tracer.ts) allow you to pass in the span that should be a parent.  Instead, this information is stored on the passed in open telemetry context object.  Specifically, the intended pattern here is that you can fetch the span that should be the parent (i.e. the span that's active) by using the context's `getSpanContext` method.

You can see an example of this in the [default Node.js SDK/tracer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/main/packages/opentelemetry-sdk-trace-base/src/Tracer.ts#L239-L244): 

The becomes a bit complicated because, currently, this span context is _initially set_ by whatever tracecontext propagator is currently being used

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/04f9edd12fb2f42898bee7086691e47b3ab9b629/packages/opentelemetry-core/src/trace/W3CTraceContextPropagator.ts#L120

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/04f9edd12fb2f42898bee7086691e47b3ab9b629/packages/opentelemetry-propagator-b3/src/B3SinglePropagator.ts#L86

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/04f9edd12fb2f42898bee7086691e47b3ab9b629/packages/opentelemetry-propagator-b3/src/B3MultiPropagator.ts#L137

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/04f9edd12fb2f42898bee7086691e47b3ab9b629/packages/opentelemetry-propagator-jaeger/src/JaegerPropagator.ts#L111

The trickiness came from the fact that we're not using these W3C propagators in the Node.js agent bridge -- trace context needs to be propagated when creating a transaction.  This means that in cases where we're starting a transaction and assigning it to the ElasticOtelSpan object, we also need to set that span context on the open telemetry context object.

Reviewer: > This means that in cases where we're starting a transaction and assigning it to the ElasticOtelSpan object, we also need to set that span context on the open telemetry context object.

The idea for the bridges is that there's just a single context storage - the internal one of the agent. 

The case you mentioned is handled by this part of the spec:

> After activating an Elastic span via the agent's API, the [`Context`] returned via the [get current context API] should contain that Elastic span

What it means is that when [`ContextManager::active`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-api/blob/b125324438fb2f24eb80c7c6673afc8cfc99575e/src/context/types.ts#L47) is called, the bridge implementation of the interface would create a `Context` on-the-fly which contains the Elastic span.

> The trickiness came from the fact that we're not using these W3C propagators in the Node.js agent bridge -- trace context needs to be propagated when creating a transaction. 

I don't think there's a need to implement a custom W3C propagators in the Node.js agent bridge. You can just rely on the provided implementation.

> The becomes a bit complicated because, currently, this span context is initially set by whatever tracecontext propagator is currently being used

The trace context propagators don't alter the context storage. It's a bit confusing but [`trace.setSpanContext`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-api/blob/main/src/trace/context-utils.ts), which is [called by the propagators](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/04f9edd12fb2f42898bee7086691e47b3ab9b629/packages/opentelemetry-core/src/trace/W3CTraceContextPropagator.ts#L120), only creates an immutable copy of the provided `Context` and sets the `span`. In the case of `W3CTraceContextPropagator`, the span is a "fake" `NonRecordingSpan`. The whole purpose of this is to populate a `Context` object that has the trace ids from the `traceparent` header.

Personally, I find that part of the OTel API a bit bloated and a source of unnecessary ceremony and allocation.

Happy to jump on a zoom if that was unclear.

## OpenTelemetry API (Tracing)

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) (OTel in short) provides a vendor-neutral API that allows to capture tracing, logs and metrics data.

Agents MAY provide a bridge implementation of OpenTelemetry Tracing API following this specification.
When available, implementation MUST be configurable and should be disabled by default when marked as `experimental`.

> The bridge implementation relies on APM Server version 7.16 or later, as a result when sending data to a server < 7.16 is recommended.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The bridge implementation relies on APM Server version 7.16 or later. Agents SHOULD recommend this version to users in bridge documentation.
```

### Span status

OTel spans have a [Status](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#set-status)
field to indicate the status of the underlying task they represent.

When the [Set Status](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#set-status) on OTel API is used, we can map it directly to `span.outcome`:
- OK => Success
- Error => Failure
- Unset (default) => Unknown

However, when not provided explicitly agents can infer the outcome from the presence of a reported error.
This behavior is not expected with OTel API with status, thus bridged spans/transactions should NOT have their outcome
altered by reporting (or lack of reporting) of an error. Here the behavior should be identical to when the end-user provides
the outcome explicitly and thus have higher priority over the inferred value.

### Attributes mapping

OTel relies on key-value pairs for span attributes.
Keys and values are protocol-specific and are defined in [semantic convention](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions) specification.

> In order to minimize the mapping complexity in agents, most of the mapping between OTel attributes and agent protocol will be delegated to APM server:

Reviewer 7: Makes sense, but looking at the inference algorithm (which is an additional one to one we already have), and result/outcome inference - it seems reasonable to reconsider moving more login from agents to the server.
Not blocking this PR of course, but I think something to reconsider

Author: I agree with you, being able to delegate all of the mapping and only implement it once would be great.

The inference algorithm on the agent is only required for the "essential" fields as they are reused by other agent features.
- type (and subtype) are required for breakdown metrics: making this feature otel-compliant seems challenging.
- outcome is required as we map it from otel status and don't store it as-is. (in hindsight maybe copying this one to `otel.status` next to `otel.attributes` would have been a good idea.

Also, this means that any OTel processors will be bypassed and ignored by the bridge.

### Attributes mapping

OTel relies on key-value pairs for span attributes. Keys and values are protocol-specific and are defined in [semantic convention](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions) specification.

In order to minimize the mapping complexity in agents, most of the mapping between OTel attributes and agent protocol will be delegated to APM server:
- All OTel span attributes should be captured as-is and written to agent protocol.
- APM server will handle the mapping between OTel attributes and their native transaction/spans equivalents
- Some native span/transaction attributes will still require mapping within agents for [compatibility with existing features](#compatibility-mapping)

OpenTelemetry attributes should be stored in `otel.attributes` as a flat key-value pair mapping added to `span` and `transaction` objects:
```json
{
  // [...] other span/transaction attributes
  "otel": {
    "attributes": {
      "db.system": "mysql",
      "db.statement": "SELECT * from table_1"
    }
  }
}
```

> When the APM server version does not support `otel.attributes` property, agents should use `labels` as fallback with OTel attribute

Reviewer 8: Can we add the information here which APM Server version supports `otel.attributes`?

Author: We don't know yet, I've just opened an issue for that : https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/6259

Author: Update: this has been added into `7.16.0`

> name as key.

Reviewer 9: When sending events via this bridge, will all the required fields still be populated by the apm agents or do we need to change the json spec beyond adding the `otel.attributes`?

Reviewer: These are the only required properties, right?
https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/blob/889da019ef4fd88540e0b6a8443143727acab111/docs/spec/v2/transaction.json#L1008-L1014
https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/blob/889da019ef4fd88540e0b6a8443143727acab111/docs/spec/v2/span.json#L762-L769

These should all be populated. The only thing agents need be aware of is to infer `type`.
Hypothetically speaking, could agents sent an empty string for the `type` and rely on APM Server to do the inference based on the `otel.attributes`?

Author: +1 on keeping the current required fields, it is fine to use empty strings.

Agents will have to infer `type` anyway, but maybe as a general rule we can add that any attribute set into `otel.attributes` should override its IntakeV2 counterpart when there is a direct mapping.
For example, if we have `span.otel.attribute['span.type']` provided, it will override `span.type` even if the latter is provided, hence having an empty `span.type` would be fine.

Thus, for agents, that could allow to avoid duplicating some attributes (`name`, `type`, ...) when those have a direct mapping.

Reviewer: I have found the mapping rules that APM Server uses to infer type/subtype/action.

* Transactions: https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/blob/a275ed9dc843762b42737a108b47533afa1eef70/processor/otel/traces.go#L404-L414
* Spans: https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/blob/a275ed9dc843762b42737a108b47533afa1eef70/processor/otel/traces.go#L715-L756

Author: Mapping has been implemented in APM server 7.16, so we can resolve this conversation thread for now.

When the APM server supports `otel.attributes` property, the server-side mapping should be identical to the one
that is applied to handle native OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) intake.

### Compatibility mapping

Agents should ensure compatibility with the following features:
- breakdown metrics
- [dropped spans statistics](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md)
- [compressed spans](handling-huge-traces/tracing-spans-compress.md)

As a consequence, agents have to infer and provide values for the following attributes:

> - `transaction.name`

Reviewer: the transaction and span name don't have to be inferred as there's a dedicated OTel API method to set a span name

Author: As far as I understand:
- `span.name` is required for compressed spans as it's used to define the "sameness" between spans
- `transaction.name` is used in breakdown metrics

Reviewer: I'm not saying the names are not required. I'm just saying that there are no inference rules based on `otel.attributes` as the name can be taken directly from the span builder/span methods ex. `tracer.spanBuilder("span name")`, `span.updateName("span name")`

Author: In fact, I probably mis-read your comment here, while we don't have to _infer_ the value from otel attributes, we have to _set it_ from the values provided by otel. Maybe here just fixing the wording would be enough to remove this ambibuity.

Author: Right, there is no `type` nor `subtype` for otel spans.
I'll take the inference algorithm from apm-server + add extensive tests to ensure consistency here.

- `transaction.type`
- `span.name`
- `span.type`
- `span.subtype`
- `span.name`

> - `span.destination.service.resource`

Reviewer: What's the logic for inferring these? It should be in line with what APM Server is doing.

Author: Should be now covered by the spec, both in written & executable forms.
